Node revamp: Introduction to Express (#27597)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: nodeJS/express/introduction_to_express.md

### Introduction

> In the previous lesson, you got up and running with Node. You learned how to read and write data from files on the server, and use those to serve up a multi-page website. You may have found this a somewhat verbose and cumbersome process and may have even wondered how on Earth we would manage more complex procedures.

Reviewer: Do you mean previous lesson or previous section?

Also, not sure about the word "procedures", let's go with "use cases" or something similar: 
```suggestion
In the previous lesson, you got up and running with Node. You learned how to read and write data from files on the server, and use those to serve up a multi-page website. You may have found this a somewhat verbose and cumbersome process and may have even wondered how on Earth we would manage more complex use cases.
```

> In this course, we are going to be using a backend framework called [Express](https://expressjs.com/). It will handle some of the more cumbersome things for us, and make the things we did previously far simpler. Express itself is an intentionally barebones and unopinionated framework; it allows us to do many things how we want, and to extend it with only the features we need. While this gives us great flexibility in how we do things, it can be a little tricky deciding between multiple viable options at times.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion: 
```suggestion
In this course, we are going to be using a backend framework called [Express](https://expressjs.com/). It exposes an easy to use API that handles a lot of the implementation details for us. Express itself is an intentionally barebones and unopinionated framework; it allows us to do many things how we want, and to extend it with only the features we need. While this gives us great flexibility in how we do things, it can be a little tricky deciding between multiple viable options at times.
```

Author: Like the more streamlined wording. I've gone for even more streamlined as I'm not sure about explicitly saying "this is easy to use/has an easy to use XYZ", but the latter part is definitely more than sufficient.

> Going forward, we will be diving into how we can use Express in various ways, such as to create a full-stack application using the Model View Controller (MVC) pattern, as well as to create a REST API just like ones you will have used before for things such as the Weather App or the React Shopping Cart projects. Along the way, we will be learning about things like databases, authentication, and much more. There is a lot to take in, so take it steady, and do not be afraid to ask our community for help in [our Discord server](https://discord.gg/theodinproject)!

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this sentence belongs here, makes the lesson sound like an intro to a course. Don't feel strongly towards it, your call.

```suggestion
Going forward, we will be diving into how we can use Express in various ways, such as to create a full-stack application using the Model View Controller (MVC) pattern, as well as to create a REST API just like ones you will have used before for things such as the Weather App or the React Shopping Cart projects. There is a lot to take in, so take it steady, and do not be afraid to ask our community for help in [our Discord server](https://discord.gg/theodinproject)!
```

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

> - Describe what Express is.
> - Describe the relationship between Express and Node.
> - Set up a basic Express server.
> - Describe how an incoming request is processed and ultimately responded to by the server.
> - Describe what a middleware function is.
> - Describe how to use `nodemon` to automatically restart your application when a change is made.

Reviewer: The first two items don't add a lot of value, they could be removed altogether.
```suggestion
- Set up a basic Express server.
- Describe how an incoming request is processed and ultimately responded to by the server.
- Describe what a middleware function is.
- Describe how to use `nodemon` to automatically restart your application when a change is made.
```

### Setting up Express

> Let's make a basic Express app. Inside a new directory, start by running `npm init` and filling in each option to create a `package.json`. Once that's created, we can install the Express dependency.

Reviewer: We could just ask learners to run `npm init -y`. Your call.

Author: We could. I also just noticed that `package.json` defaults to `"main": "index.js"`.
I don't think this should be any issue really since AFAIK it's only for creating an npm package so it knows what entry point to use when the package is imported.

I guess fine to leave `main` at that and just don't mention it?

`npm init -y` would probably be easier.

```bash
npm install express
```

We can now create an `app.js` file that will serve as the starting point for our Express server. We could name this file anything we want, such as `index.js` or `main.js`, but we will use the same name used in the Express documentation. Inside `app.js`, we will have the following:

```javascript
const express = require("express");
const app = express();

app.get("/", (req, res) => res.send("Hello, world!"));

const PORT = 3000;
app.listen(PORT, () => console.log(`My first Express app - listening on port ${PORT}!`));
```

> Let's break this down. Firstly, we import `express` using `require()`, then we call it to create the actual server that we store in the `app` variable. While you can technically do this here in one line via `const app = require("express")();`, very often you will need features that come from properties on `express`. Many of these features will be covered in later lessons.

Reviewer: Feels to verbose, and not sure if we need to add the `require('express')();` thing. Wording suggestion:
```suggestion
Let's break this down. We import and call `express` to initialize the `app` variable.  This is our server.
```

Author: In fairness, not the greatest show but I actually completely forgot I wrote this extra `require()()` stuff in. The initial idea was to answer "bu why do we need an intermediary variable?" but in hindsight, don't think that'd be a common question and anyone who does ask that in the community can just be asnwered that/told to keep going.

We then have a `route handler` - the line beginning with `app.get`. We will come back to this in a moment.

> Finally, we tell our server to listen for incoming requests requests on port 3000 of our [localhost](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost) (which is basically just the computer's local connection). While port 3000 is the default choice, you can use any unused port (for example, Vite's dev server uses port 5173 by default). Back in your terminal, if you run `node app.js` then all being well, you should see `My first Express app - listening on port 3000!` logged. Congratulations! Your first Express server is now running.

Reviewer: Personal preference: We make the congratulations sentence its own para, your call though
```suggestion
Finally, we tell our server to listen for incoming requests requests on port 3000 of our [localhost](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost) (which is basically just the computer's local connection). While port 3000 is the default choice, you can use any unused port (for example, Vite's dev server uses port 5173 by default). Back in your terminal, if you run `node app.js` then all being well, you should see `My first Express app - listening on port 3000!` logged.

Congratulations! Your first Express server is now running.
```

> Finally, we tell our server to listen for requests on port 3000 of our [localhost](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost) (which is basically just the computer's local connection). 3000 is an arbitrary and somewhat conventional default choice, but you can technically use any unused port (e.g. Vite's dev server uses port 5173 by default). Back in your terminal, if you enter `node app.js` then all being well, you should see `My first Express app - listening on port 3000!` logged. Congratulations! Your first Express server is now running.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion: 
```suggestion
Finally, we tell our server to listen for requests on port 3000 of our [localhost](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost) (which is basically just the computer's local connection). 3000 is an arbitrary and somewhat conventional default choice, but you can technically use any unused port (e.g. Vite's dev server uses port 5173 by default). Back in your terminal, if you run `node app.js` then all being well, you should see `My first Express app - listening on port 3000!` logged. Congratulations! Your first Express server is now running.
```

> Finally, we tell our server to listen for requests on port 3000 of our [localhost](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost) (which is basically just the computer's local connection). 3000 is an arbitrary and somewhat conventional default choice, but you can technically use any unused port (e.g. Vite's dev server uses port 5173 by default). Back in your terminal, if you enter `node app.js` then all being well, you should see `My first Express app - listening on port 3000!` logged. Congratulations! Your first Express server is now running.

Reviewer: What about adding in a lesson note titled "The Port Variable". It says something like "`port` is usually a environment variable and we'll cover environment variables later. For now, it's perfectly fine to have it as a global variable."

Author: A lesson note sounds good. Might help throw in some visual variance as well.

Reviewer: I've been thinking about this. I'm inclined towards covering environment variables earlier, since learners will be dealing with them during deployments.

I think we could even cover env vars before the Express section altogether.

There's also a relevant issue on it https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/26851

Author: Environment variables being covered before Express does make a heap load of sense, and I'm very on board with that idea.
One of the problems with the current order is that the Local Library tutorial doesn't expect you to push to a repo until the end, so it instructs you to hardcode a DB connection string. Only when it reaches the end with deployment does it tell you to swap it for an env variable, push to GitHub, then set the env value in the host. But then people will often push to a repo only to discover later they probably weren't supposed to, and now have their connection string publicly visible. So .env mention is being brought forwards as a bandaid, but then that makes the security lesson kinda moot since most of it is about .env ...

For now, how would you prefer me to handle env variables in this lesson? Make the wording change with the assumption that env has already been covered pre-Express? Then it'll be resolved when we do get to introducing it in the pre-Express section in a later milestone.

Reviewer: Yeah, we can assume learners know about env vars in this lesson.

### A request's journey

> Now that our server is running and listening on port 3000, let's send it a request. In a browser, navigate to `http://localhost:3000/` (if you omit the `/` at the end, then the browser will invisibly add it for you). All this does is tell the browser to send a `GET` request to the `/` route of whatever server is at port 3000 of our localhost (which is our Express server!) and display in the window whatever it receives in response.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that our server is up and running on port 3000, it's time to send it a request! Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:3000/.` Don't worry if you forget the trailing slash `/` at the end – the browser will silently add it for you. This action instructs your browser to send a `GET` request to the `/` route of whatever server is running at port 3000 on our localhost (which happens to be our Express server!), and display in the window whatever it receives in the response.
```

Whenever you navigate to any web URL this way, this is essentially what you are doing. Navigating to `https://theodinproject.com/paths` via the address bar is just telling the browser to send a `GET` request to the `/paths` route at `https://theodinproject.com`, then display what it receives in response.

> Once you navigate to `http://localhost:3000/`, you should see `Hello, world!` appear in the window. Let's break down how our Express code got us here.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion:
```suggestion
Once you navigate to `http://localhost:3000/`, you should see `Hello, world!` appear in the window. Magic, right?
```

Author: Oooh, I *like* it. Very snazzy.

> When our server receives our `GET` request, Express stores the request in a [`request` object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#req). This request gets passed through a chain of functions we call `middleware functions` until eventually, a middleware function tells Express to actually respond to the request.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion:
```suggestion
When our server receives our `GET` request, Express stores the request in a [`request` object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#req). This request gets passed through a chain of functions we call `middleware functions` until eventually, a middleware function tells Express to respond to the request.
```

> When our server receives our `GET` request, Express stores the request in a [`request` object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#req). This request gets passed through a chain of functions we call `middleware functions` until eventually, a middleware function tells Express to actually respond to the request.

Reviewer 3: This is one of several places with a link where part of the link text is code formatted; this [tends to look somewhat wonky](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/preview?uuid=bd4a27c8-f851-4a97-ae83-1990be86e4a9) because the underline will get split between the code and the rest of the text, making it look like they are separate links

Author: Fair shout! Looking at it again, it would perfectly suffice without the backticks anyway given they're actually the only places I had those words backticked. The link visuals are sufficient.

> In our example, the request comes through as a `GET` request to the `/` route. This matches the route handler we have.

Reviewer: We could be more explicit here: 
```suggestion
In our example, the request comes through as a `GET` request to the `/` route. This matches the route handler we have in our `app.js` file.
```

```javascript
app.get("/", (req, res) => res.send("Hello, world!"));
```

We will discuss routes and route handlers in more detail in a later lesson, but to summarise the above line, it tells Express "if a `GET` request comes through to the `/` route, run the request through the following chain of middleware functions". Here, we only have a single function.

> If we had defined multiple route handlers, Express would pass the request through the first one to match the requested route. Order matters!

Author: Definitely agree with the improved clarity.

> We will break down routes and route handlers in more detail in a later lesson, but to summarise the above line, it tells Express "if a `GET` request comes through to the `/` route, run the request through the following chain of middleware functions". Here, we only have a single middleware function in this chain.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion: 
```suggestion
We will discuss routes and route handlers in more detail in a later lesson, but to summarise the above line, it tells Express "if a `GET` request comes through to the `/` route, run the request through the following chain of middleware functions". Here, we only have a single function.
```

> Express takes the callback function we gave it and passes the request object into the first parameter (commonly named `req` by convention), and a [response object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res) into the second parameter (commonly named `res`). Our callback tells the response object to respond to the request by `.send`ing the string `"Hello, world!"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Express takes the callback function we gave it and passes a request object into the first parameter (commonly named `req` by convention), and a [response object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res) into the second parameter (commonly named `res`). Our callback tells the response object to respond to the request by `.send`ing the string `"Hello, world!"`.
```

> Express takes the callback function we gave it and passes the request object into the first parameter (commonly named `req` by convention), and a [response object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res) into the second parameter (commonly named `res`). Our callback tells the response object to respond to the request by `.send`ing the string `"Hello, world!"`.

Reviewer: Wording suggestion
```suggestion
Express takes the callback function we gave it and passes the request object into the first parameter (conventionally named `req`), and a [response object](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res) into the second parameter (`res`). Our callback tells the response object to respond to the request by `.send`ing the string `"Hello, world!"`.
```

> There is no more code to run and the function returns. Since Express has been told to respond to the request, it ends the request here. Meanwhile, the browser receives our server's response and displays it on screen, which is our `"Hello, world!"` string. We could send nearly anything in response. We could even [tell Express to send a file](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.sendFile).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since there is no more code to run, the function returns and Express responds to the request, effectively ending the request-response cycle. Meanwhile, the browser receives our server's response, which is our "Hello, world!" string, and displays it on the screen. We could send nearly anything in a response. We could even [tell Express to send a file](https://expressjs.com/en/api.html#res.sendFile).
```

### Nodemon

> After you run your server with `node app.js`, if you make any changes to any JavaScript and JSON files in the project directory, these changes will not be reflected in the server unless you manually interrupt and rerun `node app.js`. Similarly to how Webpack and Vite's dev servers would restart and rebuild your site when you make a change to a file, you can use [Nodemon](https://www.npmjs.com/package//nodemon) to run your `app.js` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you run your server with `node app.js`, any changes to JavaScript and JSON files in your project directory won't be reflected automatically unless you manually interrupt and rerun `node app.js`. To avoid this manual process, you can use [Nodemon](https://www.npmjs.com/package/nodemon) to run your "app.js" file. Nodemon automatically restarts and rebuilds your site when you make changes to files, similar to Webpack and Vite's dev servers.
```

> Our recommendation would be to add it as a dev dependency and write an npm script that runs `nodemon app.js`.

Reviewer: Love this suggestion. Though I wonder if Node's built-in watch will suffice for the course's use case?

Author: I thought about that but given it's still experimental in LTS (heck, even in v21), I opted against it as I feel the curriculum should stick to recommending stable features. Similarly to how Jest's native ESM support is still experimental due to the relevant Node APIs being unstable - hence it'd be better to stick with the very quick babel setup for Jest/ESM usage.

Reviewer: Makes sense

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

> 1. Go back to your [Basic Informational Site project](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/nodejs-basic-informational-site), install Express and rewrite the project using it! You should be able to do most of this with just a few `app.get()`s.

Reviewer: We can add some reading resources from the Express docs. This will be super valuable for our learners.

This are the sections I have in mind (as they are already covered in the lesson):

- https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#app.get.method
- https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#app.listen
- https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res.send

Author: I was of the mind that at least for app.get and res.send, they'd be more suitable in the routes lesson perhaps? Since that's when we'd ideally be breaking down the anatomy of a route handler and middleware function, where both of these can be discussed in more detail.

And I feel app.listen as a sole "extra reading" feels a bit off, though that may just be me.

Reviewer: Rather than specific links, we can just link the Express site https://expressjs.com/ and ask learners to explore the documentation on their own with wording similar to "Spend a few minutes exploring the Express documentation so you can get a feel for it. We'll be referencing a lot of content from the docs in the next lessons"

Author: Sensible - I'll add that as an assignment step before the basic info site rewrite.

</div>

### Knowledge check

The following questions are an opportunity to reflect on key topics in this lesson. If you can't answer a question, click on it to review the material, but keep in mind you are not expected to memorize or master this knowledge.

- [What is Express?](https://expressjs.com/)

> - [What is localhost?](https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Localhost)

Reviewer: Not sure if "What is localhost?" is an important learning of the lesson
```suggestion
```
